+++
title = "High frequency-ratio anagrams"
+++

I love looking up words on [Wiktionary](https://wiktionary.org/) in my free
time. Looking up _bouncy castle_ was particularly fruitful because I learned
this fairly common word is an anagram of "cyclobutanes", a comparatively rare
word I'd never heard before.

{{ image(name="bouncy-castle-wiktionary.png", height=300, invertable=true) }}

I figured it must be possible to semi-automatically find more entertaining
anagrams; you'd just need a word list and preferably some kind of commonality
metric.

My first port of call for a word list was naturally `/usr/share/dict/words`,
but unfortunately on my system (where it's provided by `wamerican`), it's fairly
small - in fact, it doesn't even contain "cyclobutanes".

Blessedly though, Google seems to have forgotten it's still hosting a common
good: [Google Books' _Ngram Viewer_ dataset](https://storage.googleapis.com/books/ngrams/books/datasetsv2.html)
\- every single ngram from every book Google has OCRed and how many times they've
seen it. Now, this is a dataset of _ngrams_, not _words_, but 1-gram ngram
basically means the same thing as "word" and
[you should just not worry about it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8niIHChc1Y).

## Massaging the Data

The dataset is split into about 25 files with one CSV for each letter
of the alphabet, so I threw together a [script](https://github.com/ea935/x/blob/master/anagrams/download.py)
to download all of the CSVs.

Additionally, the data isn't in the exact right format yet. The CSVs actually
record how many times a word was seen _in a given year_, and how many pages and
volumes it was seen on. This makes the CSVs way bigger than they need to be for
my purposes, which makes computations way slower. So I have to fix that too.
At first I wrote another Python script to do this, but my naïve algorithm was
frankly way too slow so I scrapped it and [used Rust instead](https://github.com/ea935/x/blob/master/anagrams/src/main.rs#L102).
I also [sorted the words by frequency](https://github.com/ea935/x/blob/master/anagrams/src/main.rs#L81)
so that I can find anagrams with the highest frequency ratio by selecting a word
from the top of the list then iterating up from the bottom.

Something I discovered very quickly is that my code shouldn't [consider a word an anagram of itself](https://github.com/ea935/x/blob/master/anagrams/src/main.rs#L45) (is a word an anagram of itself?), and that Google's dataset wasn't perfect.
Because the data is from OCRed books, and OCR isn't infallible, most of the words
with very low frequencies were actually other words misspelt or misread, so I
[skipped words with very low frequencies](https://github.com/ea935/x/blob/master/anagrams/src/main.rs#L49)
too. I also threw out words [under 10 letters long](https://github.com/ea935/x/blob/master/anagrams/src/main.rs#L26)
because those are boring.

My method of determining whether two words were anagrams was naïve (this is a
theme) - sort the letters of both words and check if the results are identical.

And that's pretty much it! My program started spitting out multiple anagrams
every second.

{{ image(name="anagram-o-matic.webp", raw=true) }}

It still produces "anagrams" between a word and a misspelling, but there's few
enough to filter out manually - which I have to do anyway, because computers
are incapable yet of objectively measuring humour.

## Results

First and foremost, this gem:

| Eins          | Zwei           |
| ------------- | -------------- |
| legislator    | allegorists    |

### Common/uncommon Pairs

| Uno            | Dos            |
| -------------- | -------------- |
| regulation     | urogenital     |
| oscillation    | colonialist    |
| generations    | nitrogenase    |
| enlargement    | greenmantle    |
| incorporate    | procreation    |
| petrochemicals | cephalometric  |
| disharmony     | hydramnios     |
| paternalistic  | antiparticles  |
| intoxicate     | excitation     |
| relationships  | rhinoplasties  |
| residential    | estrildinae    |
| nationalised   | desalination   |
| Gasherbrum     | hamburgers     |
| parenthesis    | interphases    |
| complicates    | ectoplasmic    |
| absolution     | isobutanol     |
| insatiable     | banalities     |

### Antonym Pairs

| Un            | Deux           |
| ------------- | -------------- |
| compressed    | decompress     |
| marginally    | alarmingly     |
| desecration   | considerate    |

### Misc.

| 一            | 二             |
| ------------- | -------------- |
| assimilation  | islamisation   |
| catherals     | hard castle    |
| tapestries    | striptease     |
| inconsiderate | containerised  |
| streamlined   | derailments    |
| supersonic    | percussion     |
| chattering    | ratcheting     |
| mountaineer   | enumeration    |
| algorithms    | logarithms     |
| recruitment   | current time   |
| interpreter   | reinterpret    |
| reductions    | discounter     |

The source code is available
[here](https://github.com/ea935/x/tree/master/anagrams). I also included
the sorted word/frequency data as a CSV.
